README.md, before:

# De-Formed Validations
De-Formed Validations is an unopinionated library to manage validations in [React](https://reactjs.org/).

The goal of de-formed is to provide straight forward, 
clean, and clear syntax while implementing all the functionality needed to handle both simple and complex validation requirements.  Very little attempt has been 
made to abstract the implementation of this library from the developer giving it a function-based, Lego-like approach to design validation patterns that meet your 
requirements. In fact, only 2 helper functions are unavailble to the API providing as little abstraction as possible.

De-Formed takes a simple schema definition and then provides you with a React Hook containing various objects and functions that can be imported anywhere, as
needed, to handle validation related tasks. Developers can design the validation behavior catered to their specific needs without having to worry about managing 
the validation data themselves.

## Why use De-Formed?
1) Maintain separation between form logic, presentation logic, and validation logic.
2) Let your architecture be guided by you and not your form library. 
3) Customize validation behavior with ease in contextual situations.
4) Lego-style approach makes reusing and nesting validations a snap.
5) Light-weight and easy to test.

## Usage
### Step 1: Create a file to define your validations. 
To avoid unnecessary complexity, use the property names of the object you want to validate for the schema property names. Validation functions can receive an
optional second parameter of state if needed.

```ts
import {useValidation} from 'validation.hook';
import {Dog} from 'types';

export const DogValidation = () => {
  return useValidation<Dog>({
    name: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Cannot be Bob.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.toLowerCase() !== 'bob',
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Name is required.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.length > 0,
      },
    ],
    breed: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Cannot be Ross if name is Bob.',
        validation: (val: string, state: Dog) => {
          return state.name.toLowerCase() === 'bob'
            ? val.toLowerCase() === 'ross'
            : true;
        }
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Breed is required.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.length > 0,
      },
    ]
  });
};
```
## Step 2: Plug and Play
```tsx
import React, { useState, FC } from 'react';
import { Dog } from 'types';
import { DogValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Dog.validation';

export const Example1: FC = () => {

  const [state, setState] = useState<Dog>({
    name: '',
    breed: '',
  });

  const v = DogValidation();

  const onChange = (event: any) => {
    const { value, name } = event.target;
    const data = { [name]: value };
    setState({ ...state, ...data });
  };

  const handleChange = v.validateOnChange(onChange, state);
  const handleBlur = v.validateOnBlur(state);

  const handleSubmit = (e: any) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    const canSubmit = v.validateAll(state);
    console.log('canSubmit', canSubmit);
  };

  return (
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
      <div>
        <label>Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.name}
        />
        {v.getError('name') && <p>{v.getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Breed</label>
        <input
          name="breed"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.breed}
        />
        {v.getError('breed') && <p>{v.getError('breed')}</p>}
      </div>
      <button disabled={!v.isValid}>Submit</button>
    </form>
  );
};
```
## Codependent Validation
```tsx
import React, { useState, FC } from 'react';
import { Dog } from 'types';
import { DogValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Dog.validation';

export const Example2: FC = () => {

  const [state, setState] = useState<Dog>({
    name: '',
    breed: '',
  });

  const v = DogValidation();

  const validateTogether = (name: string, data: any) => {
    const properties = ['name', 'breed'];
    properties.includes(name) && v.validateAll(data, properties);
  };

  const handleChange = (event: any) => {
    { ... }
    validateTogether(name, updatedState);
  };

  const handleBlur = (event: any) => {
    const { name } = event.target;
    validateTogether(name, state);
  };

  const handleSubmit = (e: any) => { ... };

  return (
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
      <div>
        <label>Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.name}
        />
        {v.getError('name') && <p>{v.getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Breed</label>
        <input
          name="breed"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.breed}
        />
        {v.getError('breed') && <p>{v.getError('breed')}</p>}
      </div>
      <button>Submit</button>
    </form>
  );
};
```
## Nested Forms

### Nested Validation Schema
```tsx
import {useValidation} from 'validation.hook';
import {Person, Dog} from 'types';
import {DogValidation} from './Dog.validation';

export const PersonValidation = () => {
  const { validateAll: validateDog } = DogValidation();
  return useValidation<Person>({
    name: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Must be Bob Ross.',
        validation: (val: string) => {
          return val.toLowerCase() === 'bob ross';
        }
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Name is required.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.length > 0,
      },
    ],
    age: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Cannot be boomer.',
        validation: (val: number) => val < 50,
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Must be at least 18.',
        validation: (val: number) => val >= 18,
      },
    ],
    dog: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'All Dogs must be valid.',
        validation: (dogs: Dog[]) => {
          return dogs.reduce((prev: any, dog: Dog) => validateDog(dog), true);
        }
      }
    ]
  });
};
```
### Top Level Form:
```tsx
import React, { useState, FC } from 'react';
import { Dog, Person, emptyPerson } from 'types';
import { PersonValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Person.validation';
import { DogForm } from './DogForm';
import { upsertItem } from 'util/utilities';

export const Example3: FC = () => {

  const [state, setState] = useState<Person>(emptyPerson());
  const [runValidations, setRunValidations] = useState<boolean>(false);

  const {
    validateAll,
    validateOnBlur,
    validateOnChange,
    getError,
  } = PersonValidation();

  const onPersonChange = (event: any) => { ... };
  const handleOnChange = validateOnChange(onPersonChange, state);
  const handleOnBlur = validateOnBlur(state);
  const handleDogChange = (index: number) => (event: any) => { ... };
  const handleSubmit = (e: any) => { ... };

  return (
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
      <div>
        <label>Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleOnBlur}
          onChange={handleOnChange}
          value={state.name}
        />
        {getError('name') && <p>{getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Age</label>
        <input
          name="age"
          onBlur={handleOnBlur}
          onChange={handleOnChange}
          value={state.age}
        />
        {getError('age') && <p>{getError('age')}</p>}
      </div>
      {state.dog.map((dog: Dog, index: number) => (
        <DogForm
          key={index}
          dog={dog}
          onChange={handleDogChange(index)}
          runValidations={runValidations}
        />
      ))}
      <button>Submit</button>
    </form>
  );
};
```
### Nested Form Element:
```tsx
import React, {FC, useEffect} from 'react';
import { Dog } from 'types';
import { DogValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Dog.validation';

type DogFormProps = {
  dog: Dog;
  onChange: (event: any) => any;
  runValidations: boolean;
};

export const DogForm: FC<DogFormProps> = (props) => {

  const { dog, onChange, runValidations } = props;
  const {
    validateOnBlur,
    validateOnChange,
    getError,
    validateAll,
  } = DogValidation();

  const handleDogBlur = validateOnBlur(dog);
  const handleDogChange = validateOnChange(onChange, dog);

  useEffect(() => {
    runValidations && validateAll(dog);
  }, [runValidations]);

  return (
    <>
      <div>
        <label>Dog Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleDogBlur}
          onChange={handleDogChange}
          value={dog.name}
        />
        {getError('name') && <p>{getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Breed</label>
        <input
          name="breed"
          onBlur={handleDogBlur}
          onChange={handleDogChange}
          value={dog.breed}
        />
        {getError('breed') && <p>{getError('breed')}</p>}
      </div>
    </>
  );
};
```
## Available API Options: 
```
getError          --> current error message for a field
getFieldValid     --> returns whether a specific field is valid
isValid           --> boolean that represents if all fields in hook valid
validate          --> function that validates a single field
validateAll       --> function that validates all keys in hook
validateIfTrue    --> function that updates hook if the validation passes (useful for onChange events)
validateOnBlur    --> function that returns a new function which will update the validation state
validateOnChange  --> function that returns a new function which will update the validation state
validationErrors  --> list of active validation errors
validationState   --> object that contains isValid and errorMessage for each field
```
## Future Features:
- class-based version for projects that are unable to implement a hook
- yup integration maybe

## unsorted guide material:
When using state in a validation function, it is assumed that state is the object containing the property of the 
validation (e.g. "state" in the below example is assumed to be a Dog object by the API). If you choose to use an alternate object, ignore that validation key when 
you invoke validateAll by not including it in the optional second paramter. For example, if you wish to only execute the 'name' validation from the schema (or 
ignore the 'breed' validation), you can name the properties that should be evaluated during 'validateAll' in the include array:```validateAll(state, ['name'])```

Commit message:

added explanation to nested forms example

README.md, after:

# De-Formed Validations
De-Formed Validations is an unopinionated library to manage validations in [React](https://reactjs.org/).

The goal of de-formed is to provide straight forward, 
clean, and clear syntax while implementing all the functionality needed to handle both simple and complex validation requirements.  Very little attempt has been 
made to abstract the implementation of this library from the developer giving it a function-based, Lego-like approach to design validation patterns that meet your 
requirements. In fact, only 2 helper functions are unavailble to the API providing as little abstraction as possible.

De-Formed takes a simple schema definition and then provides you with a React Hook containing various objects and functions that can be imported anywhere, as
needed, to handle validation related tasks. Developers can design the validation behavior catered to their specific needs without having to worry about managing 
the validation data themselves.

## Why use De-Formed?
1) Maintain separation between form logic, presentation logic, and validation logic.
2) Let your architecture be guided by you and not your form library. 
3) Customize validation behavior with ease in contextual situations.
4) Lego-style approach makes reusing and nesting validations a snap.
5) Light-weight and easy to test.

## Usage
### Step 1: Create a file to define your validations. 
To avoid unnecessary complexity, use the property names of the object you want to validate for the schema property names. Validation functions can receive an
optional second parameter of state if needed.

```ts
import {useValidation} from 'validation.hook';
import {Dog} from 'types';

export const DogValidation = () => {
  return useValidation<Dog>({
    name: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Cannot be Bob.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.toLowerCase() !== 'bob',
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Name is required.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.length > 0,
      },
    ],
    breed: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Cannot be Ross if name is Bob.',
        validation: (val: string, state: Dog) => {
          return state.name.toLowerCase() === 'bob'
            ? val.toLowerCase() === 'ross'
            : true;
        }
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Breed is required.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.length > 0,
      },
    ]
  });
};
```
## Step 2: Plug and Play
```tsx
import React, { useState, FC } from 'react';
import { Dog } from 'types';
import { DogValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Dog.validation';

export const Example1: FC = () => {

  const [state, setState] = useState<Dog>({
    name: '',
    breed: '',
  });

  const v = DogValidation();

  const onChange = (event: any) => {
    const { value, name } = event.target;
    const data = { [name]: value };
    setState({ ...state, ...data });
  };

  const handleChange = v.validateOnChange(onChange, state);
  const handleBlur = v.validateOnBlur(state);

  const handleSubmit = (e: any) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    const canSubmit = v.validateAll(state);
    console.log('canSubmit', canSubmit);
  };

  return (
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
      <div>
        <label>Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.name}
        />
        {v.getError('name') && <p>{v.getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Breed</label>
        <input
          name="breed"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.breed}
        />
        {v.getError('breed') && <p>{v.getError('breed')}</p>}
      </div>
      <button disabled={!v.isValid}>Submit</button>
    </form>
  );
};
```
## Codependent Validation
```tsx
import React, { useState, FC } from 'react';
import { Dog } from 'types';
import { DogValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Dog.validation';

export const Example2: FC = () => {

  const [state, setState] = useState<Dog>({
    name: '',
    breed: '',
  });

  const v = DogValidation();

  const validateTogether = (name: string, data: any) => {
    const properties = ['name', 'breed'];
    properties.includes(name) && v.validateAll(data, properties);
  };

  const handleChange = (event: any) => {
    { ... }
    validateTogether(name, updatedState);
  };

  const handleBlur = (event: any) => {
    const { name } = event.target;
    validateTogether(name, state);
  };

  const handleSubmit = (e: any) => { ... };

  return (
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
      <div>
        <label>Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.name}
        />
        {v.getError('name') && <p>{v.getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Breed</label>
        <input
          name="breed"
          onBlur={handleBlur}
          onChange={handleChange}
          value={state.breed}
        />
        {v.getError('breed') && <p>{v.getError('breed')}</p>}
      </div>
      <button>Submit</button>
    </form>
  );
};
```
## Nested Forms
Nesting is not uncommon when handling dynamic forms where a user can add as many inputs as they need. Below is an example of a hypothetical form where additional
dogs can be added by the user to the form, each requiring editing and submission validations.

### Nested Validation Schema
```tsx
import {useValidation} from 'validation.hook';
import {Person, Dog} from 'types';
import {DogValidation} from './Dog.validation';

export const PersonValidation = () => {
  const { validateAll: validateDog } = DogValidation();
  return useValidation<Person>({
    name: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Must be Bob Ross.',
        validation: (val: string) => {
          return val.toLowerCase() === 'bob ross';
        }
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Name is required.',
        validation: (val: string) => val.length > 0,
      },
    ],
    age: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'Cannot be boomer.',
        validation: (val: number) => val < 50,
      },
      {
        errorMessage: 'Must be at least 18.',
        validation: (val: number) => val >= 18,
      },
    ],
    dog: [
      {
        errorMessage: 'All Dogs must be valid.',
        validation: (dogs: Dog[]) => {
          return dogs.reduce((prev: any, dog: Dog) => validateDog(dog), true);
        }
      }
    ]
  });
};
```
### Top Level Form:
```tsx
import React, { useState, FC } from 'react';
import { Dog, Person, emptyPerson } from 'types';
import { PersonValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Person.validation';
import { DogForm } from './DogForm';
import { upsertItem } from 'util/utilities';

export const Example3: FC = () => {

  const [state, setState] = useState<Person>(emptyPerson());
  const [runValidations, setRunValidations] = useState<boolean>(false);

  const {
    validateAll,
    validateOnBlur,
    validateOnChange,
    getError,
  } = PersonValidation();

  const onPersonChange = (event: any) => { ... };
  const handleOnChange = validateOnChange(onPersonChange, state);
  const handleOnBlur = validateOnBlur(state);
  const handleDogChange = (index: number) => (event: any) => { ... };
  const handleSubmit = (e: any) => { ... };

  return (
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
      <div>
        <label>Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleOnBlur}
          onChange={handleOnChange}
          value={state.name}
        />
        {getError('name') && <p>{getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Age</label>
        <input
          name="age"
          onBlur={handleOnBlur}
          onChange={handleOnChange}
          value={state.age}
        />
        {getError('age') && <p>{getError('age')}</p>}
      </div>
      {state.dog.map((dog: Dog, index: number) => (
        <DogForm
          key={index}
          dog={dog}
          onChange={handleDogChange(index)}
          runValidations={runValidations}
        />
      ))}
      <button>Submit</button>
    </form>
  );
};
```
### Nested Form Element:
```tsx
import React, {FC, useEffect} from 'react';
import { Dog } from 'types';
import { DogValidation } from 'examples/validationSchemas/Dog.validation';

type DogFormProps = {
  dog: Dog;
  onChange: (event: any) => any;
  runValidations: boolean;
};

export const DogForm: FC<DogFormProps> = (props) => {

  const { dog, onChange, runValidations } = props;
  const {
    validateOnBlur,
    validateOnChange,
    getError,
    validateAll,
  } = DogValidation();

  const handleDogBlur = validateOnBlur(dog);
  const handleDogChange = validateOnChange(onChange, dog);

  useEffect(() => {
    runValidations && validateAll(dog);
  }, [runValidations]);

  return (
    <>
      <div>
        <label>Dog Name</label>
        <input
          name="name"
          onBlur={handleDogBlur}
          onChange={handleDogChange}
          value={dog.name}
        />
        {getError('name') && <p>{getError('name')}</p>}
      </div>
      <div>
        <label>Breed</label>
        <input
          name="breed"
          onBlur={handleDogBlur}
          onChange={handleDogChange}
          value={dog.breed}
        />
        {getError('breed') && <p>{getError('breed')}</p>}
      </div>
    </>
  );
};
```
## Available API Options: 
```
getError          --> current error message for a field
getFieldValid     --> returns whether a specific field is valid
isValid           --> boolean that represents if all fields in hook valid
validate          --> function that validates a single field
validateAll       --> function that validates all keys in hook
validateIfTrue    --> function that updates hook if the validation passes (useful for onChange events)
validateOnBlur    --> function that returns a new function which will update the validation state
validateOnChange  --> function that returns a new function which will update the validation state
validationErrors  --> list of active validation errors
validationState   --> object that contains isValid and errorMessage for each field
```
## Future Features:
- class-based version for projects that are unable to implement a hook
- yup integration maybe

## unsorted guide material:
When using state in a validation function, it is assumed that state is the object containing the property of the 
validation (e.g. "state" in the below example is assumed to be a Dog object by the API). If you choose to use an alternate object, ignore that validation key when 
you invoke validateAll by not including it in the optional second paramter. For example, if you wish to only execute the 'name' validation from the schema (or 
ignore the 'breed' validation), you can name the properties that should be evaluated during 'validateAll' in the include array:```validateAll(state, ['name'])```
